=======================================================================
Unravelling Vestibular Sensory Contributions to Bicycle Balance Control
=======================================================================

:date: 2021-02-23
:status: hidden
:slug: jobs/msc/bicycle-balance-vestibular-contributions

.. figure:: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/c/c6/UCI_Indoor_Cycling_World_Championships_2006_LvT_12.jpg/640px-UCI_Indoor_Cycling_World_Championships_2006_LvT_12.jpg
   :target: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:UCI_Indoor_Cycling_World_Championships_2006_LvT_12.jpg
   :align: center

   Lord van Tasm, Wikipedia, CC-BY-SA-3.0

Background
==========

The ability to move and maintain posture in space is critically dependent on
motion and orientation information provided by the vestibular system
[Forbes2016]_. Whenever we walk, for example, vestibular contributions to
muscle activity are modulated throughout the locomotion cycle according to a
muscle's involvement in correcting for vestibular disturbances. If, however, we
are externally supported during walking, the functional use of these vestibular
inputs diminishes and vestibular-evoked responses are not observed
[Tisserand2018]_. In contrast, much less is known about how vestibular signals
contribute to balance during biking and several questions arise. What muscles
are actively involved in correcting for balance during bicycling? Is steering
control more important than upper body stabilizing mechanisms (i.e. inertia)
for keeping the body upright? Does the vestibular control of balance for
bicycling vary across the cycling phase? Does the vestibular input to bike
balance change with cycling speeds? This project aims to answer these questions
(and more!) to establish the working principles of the vestibular control of
cycling. First, this project will quantify the activity of muscles believed to
contribute to balance control when cycling. Second, a mild electrical stimulus
delivered behind the ears to manipulate normal vestibular function [Kwan2019]_
will be used to track vestibular contributions during cycling. By correlating
the stimulus to measured muscle activity we will be able to monitor vestibular
contributions throughout the cycling pattern and across conditions. These
results will reveal how vestibular signal contribute to our ability to remain
upright while cycling.

Approach
========

1. Cycling in varying conditions in an open field and/or laboratory setting
   while collecting muscle activity using EMG.
2. Electrical vestibular stimulation (i.e. currents applied via electrodes
   behind the ears) will be used to modify the vestibular sensitivity of human
   subjects.
3. We will collaborate with Dept. of Neuroscience at the Erasmus MC to
   implement the electrical stimulation.

Techniques
==========

The student will develop skills to perform biomechanical and neurophysiology
experiments in healthy controls during cycling tasks. This includes the use of
hard- and software, data collection and signal analysis, but more importantly
the use of creativity, which is essential in hypothesis generation, and for
optimal experimental design. In this project the focus will be on unraveling
how vestibular sensory feedback contributes to cycling behaviors.

References
==========

.. [Forbes2016] Forbes P.A., Luu B.L., Van der Loos H.F.M., Croft E., Inglis
   J.T., Blouin J.S. (2016), Transformation of Vestibular Signals for the
   Control of Standing in Humans, Journal of Neuroscience
.. [Tisserand2018] Tisserand R., Dakin C.J., van der Loos M., Croft E.A.,
   Inglis T.J., Blouin J.S. (2018), Down regulation of vestibular balance
   stabilizing mechanisms to enable transition between motor states, eLife
.. [Kwan2019] Kwan A., Forbes P.A., Mitchell D.E., Blouin J.S., Cullen K.E.
   (2019), Neural substrates, dynamics and thresholds of galvanic vestibular
   stimulation in the behaving primate, Nature Communications

How to Apply
============

Send an email to Dr. Jason K. Moore (j.k.moore@tudelft.nl) and Dr. Patrick
Forbes (p.forbes@erasmusmc.nl) with the title of the project in the subject
line. Include an approximately half-page motivation letter explaining why you
want to work on this project, what relevant skills you have, and your current
resume or C.V.
