===================================================
Near Zero Speed Robotically Balanced Cargo Bicycles
===================================================

:date: 2022-01-11
:status: hidden
:slug: jobs/msc/near-zero-speed-robot-cargo-bicycle

.. figure:: https://objects-us-east-1.dream.io/mechmotum/cargo-bike-balance-examples.png
   :width: 600px
   :align: center

   Possible applications on the left and one of the bike lab's robotic
   bicycles.

Two wheel cargo bicycle use has grown over the last decade. Increases in "last
mile" home delivery of goods and food requires rapid, versatile delivery in
urban areas. Bicycles with cargo areas are optimal solutions for distributed
urban delivery. The vehicles also allow for green transportation for families.
With the growth of safer bicycle infrastructure in many countries, these
vehicles replace more and more cars for various family activities.
Electrification has played a key role in making bicycles more suitable for both
of these tasks allowing for lower rider input power or even increased loads.
Electric pedal assist enables these technology adoptions, but with the existing
onboard electrical system, the opportunity to provide more types of assistance
presents itself. We are interested in expanding the applications to electric
steer assisting motors. Steer assist has the potential to improve safety and
convenience.

One particular problem cargo two-wheelers face is at low and near zero speeds
the vehicles are hard to balance and handle. Delivery people need to quickly
park their vehicle without the need for a bicycle rack or cumbersome kickstands
for quick door calls. Similarly, parents need to seat and remove their children
from the vehicle without worrying that it would fall. Also, both vehicles come
to a stop in traffic many times throughout a trip. At every instance near zero
speed, assistance in balance would relieve the rider from any difficulties of
balancing the vehicle.

Many single vehicle accidents occur in this near zero speed regime and we're
interested in finding solutions to improve safety and convenience in this speed
regime. For safety in child carrying vehicles, this is of particular concern.
Reducing the skill and effort necessary for balancing a loaded cargo bike at
low speeds would provide an accessible replacement for tasks typically
performed with cars. This could reduce the number of trips taken by car and,
with fewer cars, interactions with vulnerable road users could decrease within
urban centers.

The TU Delft Bicycle Lab has demonstrated autonomous steering control with a
robotic bicycle and balance steer assist with steer-by-wire and haptic
feedback. Ictech_ has experience in working with
embedded systems and with vehicles, ranging from electric bicycle and scooter
prototypes to working with clients to deliver self-driving cars. These
technologies will be leveraged to produce a prototype delivery cargo bicycle
which balances itself when stopped.

The MSc student selected for this project will do a internship in Gothenburg,
Sweden with Ictech_ and work closely with one of their software engineers for
the design and development of the prototype bicycle. The internship should
occur in the first half of 2022. If the internship is successful there is the
possibility to follow with a literature study and thesis project focusing on
developing and validating a robust control system for the bicycle.

.. _Ictech: https://ictech.se/

.. raw:: html

   <center>
   <iframe width="560" height="315"
   src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/Pbe6hCk6Eno" title="YouTube video player"
   frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write;
   encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
   <p>Recent Honda demonstration of zero speed balancing</p>
   </center>
